Hello everybody and welcome back.
We're going to have a look at a form of subdivision which is chopping up a face as you can see here.
We've chopped up the top face and actually extruded some additional detail from it.
We'll have a look at the specials menu as well.
And we'll have a look at why if I go into edit mode this can be a good and a bad thing as well depending
on what you're trying to achieve.
Let's find out more and hop on over into blender Hello everybody and welcome back.
So we have our model in front of us here and I'm going to demonstrate the subdivision on our live model
as well because I want you to play around with it.
Make sure you got a copy of your file wherever it may be before we continue.
So since this is the 15th one here I'm going to call this 15 challenge even before we get started.
So let's select these top faces and now we want to do an operation on them.
And it's the subdivide operation now there is a subdivision surface modifier that you may have heard
of before but we're going to touch upon that later on in the course if you use the right mouse button
it will bring up a context menu in this case the face context menu.
This is a special menu deliberately set up for face selection.
Hey guys.
Mark here quick update for you the right click menu here is actually been renamed it was incorrectly
named in a previous version of blender.
It's now the vertex context menu.
Still right click to bring up the specials.
But now it's called vertex and you click to subdivide their mind to make a were at the top there.
We've got subdivide and that's what we're going to do.
And you can see what it has done is it's subdivided the faces as they were.
So you haven't got equal subdivisions everywhere.
It just depends on what the underlying geometry was.
If I subdivide that's again what I could then do is mimic the states that I have before and select this
area here here and here.
And before we know it's we can then extrude that up and we've got some extra detail.
Okay.
Mixing up a few genres of buildings here I'm sure they didn't look quite like that.
But to demonstrate the point of subdivision we've now added extra geometry to our model really really
quickly.
Now there is a couple of issues with this.
The first one is that all of these edges.
These this this this one going around here.
If I if I hold down old and shift and select these these are all superfluous.
They're not needed.
Now before we go and get rid of them I want to show you one of the issues that we've just created for
ourselves.
If we go ahead and select this face here and try and subdivide that nothing happens or has it.
How about this face here.
Let's select what we face so turn on this face here and subdivide nothing's happened.
Well it has what we've effectively done is we've chopped this face up into even smaller edges.
And that's going to cause us no end of issues.
So if I go to Ed select we can see that it's got an edge there an edge there.
All these little micro edges and now making up this single face in fact with the face selected we can
see that the number of edges that make up that face are 14.
And that's not apparent by just looking at it.
So what can we do to sort that out.
Well I'm going to undo a couple of steps there until I see that I've got my top bit selected again.
There we go.
Out shift and select that top one there.
So one of the issues with subdividing like that is you cause a load of extra and unnecessary geometry
and we can get rid of that by dissolving so we can press the X key and dissolve those edges and we can
do the same for these.
And this one across the middle as well.
Now before I do that I do want to show you that it also breaks loop cutting.
So if I was to go control an R you can see that that bit there I can loop cuts and the loop cut itself
stops at that face won't go any further.
And that's because these faces that once were quads I only had four sides now have multiple edges so
blended just doesn't know what to do.
So let's go ahead dissolve these top edges here and see if we get back our loop cuts around our model
brilliant.
That's exactly what I wanted to see.
And it's not going around this way.
Now that's interesting.
But if we turn around to the side we see exactly why it's doing that.
We turn around here we see that it's not cuts down here.
However it is on this part.
So when we cut through our model initially and made these two areas where we're going to put our steps
and our ramp in a few lectures time here we don't have that in fact this face here is made up of one
two three four five six.
And we can double check it down here as well.
Six edges that's not ideal.
However depending what stage of modelling you're currently at and whether it's just a prototype that
you're going to eventually show someone without details of its topology how the meshes laid out.
I would argue that it's not worth trying to solve that little conundrum at the moment as to how to make
sure this has continuous edge flow going around it.
That's a lot of extra work for actually no apparent gain.
The danger is that one of these edges is inadvertently selected and let's move it's on the y axis or
it's moved slightly and now you've got a face that really can't exist it is bent and all over the place
and that I don't know if it will but that can cause us some very weird.
Yet you can see that we've got this odd diagonal line coming across the surface of our model our lamps
not particularly strong in this case if I was to select it was not in edit mode there we go go GZ and
lift it up slightly and go g or.
Which way do you need to move on the y axis.
If I make sure that that face is actually illuminated we can see that there are all sorts of funny artifacts
going on especially at low angles for the lights.
By the looks of it if I move the light to just the right angle it really shows it off.
Ah there we go.
We start to get these horrible artifacts going around and that can be avoided with good topology.
In fact look there is a line going across here and there shouldn't be by our own reckoning.
And it just looks odd and horrible.
And that's because the underlying mesh doesn't match with what we're really seeing and blenders trying
to make up for it.
In the meantime now whilst we're in object mode what we could try is having the objects selected right
clicking into on shade smooth that will sometimes sort out those type of problems.
And as you can see in this case it doesn't actually help us at all we'd have to do lots more work to
the model to make it conform to having smooth shading turn on.
So I'm going to go back to shading flats because that's just the nature of the object we're doing at
the moment and I'm going to fix this little issue here by simply undoing a couple of steps.
There we go.
But just be aware of the extra geometry that you're creating when you're doing this type of work.
And the one final thing that I want to look at here.
Let's put it back into solid shading for the moment.
Is Luke cutting around the edge here now.
That's absolutely fine.
If we wanted to put a doorway just here.
But if we wanted to go ahead and add in something going around the entire model would be a bit stuck.
And that's because we decided to do this top part of our model before Luke cutting around this area
here before we started adding these top sections on we could have easily put a loop cuts around our
model.
In fact if I go back and revert this to its previous states nothing to lose by balls doing that you
can see I can indeed cut around the model.
So do plan your work going forward because often you can find yourself being able to do something one
moment and then being unable to do it the next because of the decisions that you made in the future.
So now I can go ahead and subdivide those top areas and do exactly the same as I did before to add extra
detail.
So subdividing has a lot of benefits because we're able to add extra detail to our model.
However as you can see it's going to fall flat at some point when you're going around your model.
And this is where good topology or the layout of your vertices edges and faces really comes into its
own makes working with Blender a lot easier and you'll learn those skills as you become more proficient
as a modeller.
But for now it's time for your challenge and your challenge is to add some extra detail to the top of
the pyramid using subdivision and create a doorway at the top of the steps.
And let's have a look at a quick example.
So here we go here's the detail at the top of my mind pyramid and also a doorway at the very top.
This is roughly what we're aiming for by the end of this lecture.
Go ahead pause a video now and give this a go Okay everybody Welcome back.
Let's go ahead now and add some detail to our model.
Okay everybody Welcome back.
So I'm not going to start with this I'm going to revert my file once again to how it was previously.
I do want an entrance way at the top here so I am going to put a loop cut around my model.
I'm not going to fool around too much around the top here but I am going to add in a few little details
I am going to subdivide twice like I've done before and I'll take away the extra geometry later I'm
gonna grab this middle area and go g and Z and just lift it up to give myself a little little bit of
a different look at the top and I'm going to grab these two sets of faces each of the side and lift
those up slightly as well.
I just want a bit more interest to my model.
There's no right or wrong way of doing this but it just adds to it.
I'm gonna subdivide that top area of S. I can get some more square area.
There we go.
And I'm going to push that into my temple.
And again I'm just adding little details here.
And finally I'm going to extrude inwards here so we've got somewhere at the very top of our model for
the stairs to lead up to.
And if I wanted to yeah let's do it let's subdivide that twice and then I can do it once more with a
door in there.
Excellent.
So I've added a good bit of detail to the model overall I've not gone to too much detail that is important.
I want to come out and just have a look around I'm going to change my shaded mode to either rendered
or looked at.
Is always a good one to have a look around and what we really want is overall it not to look too detailed
in some places.
This looks absolutely fine at the moment.
I could have added some more details around the top here.
There is no end of what you can do.
I'm going to leave it there for the moment.
I'm really interested to see the designs you've come up with.
Have any of you stuff Suzanne the monkey on the top as the goddess of this particular temple.
OK.
So I'm looking forward to seeing what you guys come up with.
Please share your work over in the discussions and I'll see you all in the next lecture.